uh so having had a disability
discrimination act for 25 years
are we now treating people with more
respect and equality
well ro rose i'm not trying to
pigeonhole you here but i mean you
you're in a sense you're the obvious
person to
to answer it first i know i know i can't
imagine but but give us the benefit of
your experience um
so the disability
came in in 1995
i was 5 years old
and we found out
my life and she been better
because of it i had
an education at a mainstream school
i went to university
i got a job and with
my cerebral palsy
have been natural sexual
and independent human
beings and i am proud
of who i am and
i can read and disable
toilets and pathway rounds
because of this groundbreaking
disability yet
saying that
one 25 years old
and whenever i walk in the
street alone i will
have friends very close up
how i walk and i talk
i get abused on a daily basis
i i am not alone
in that i am not alone
and that i have had
times of learning employment
on the employment is
huge amongst the disabled people
have tried to apply for
jobs and i have been
hungry because of
how i speak
and i'm not alone because
right now a quarter of
a million disabled people
are only employed and very closer
towards the eyes horizon
i watch the goodness say
that disabled people
are overlooked but they're not
they are deliberately
ignored because
disabled people need
more care and more money
and i don't feel like
as a disabled
person i ain't getting the
care and support i
need right now
david well i mean i
it's hard to follow that it is i mean
and that was very moving
um to listen to look i suspect of course
there's been progress
over the last 25 years but we've got a
long way to go
and let me just say i i have three
children
and one of them has got a um
special sort of educational needs and i
know the struggle of parents in this
country
when they're trying to get a statement
of course there's still huge
discrimination
in employment i was thinking of the
young um
black man dragged out of the oxford
union blind
at just a year or so ago
um i think that there's a lot to do
in this country we probably have to
return
to the legislation that's required if
you look at that
story of the 20th century it's a lot of
people at the beginning of that century
certainly the disabled anyone with
educational needs
black and brown people women working
people
all oppressed in some ways put down
and by the end of the 20th century
beginning to get their rights
but we are still on that journey and as
we go into
a deep recession we know that the people
who can be
deeply affected are those with
disabilities and let me just say
if you defund local authorities like we
have in this country
if you've got local authorities like
croydon northampton going bust
with budgets cut of 50 where is the
money for adult social care
that the disabled depend on where is the
money for the
the the kit and equipment that people
need in their homes
all the money being cut in day centers
right
across the country so it's not a rosy
picture in some ways it feels like a
rolling back
and i endorse what's been said robin
i mean i i think that the point is that
in terms of either being overlooked or
deliberately ignored
is something that that society continues
to need to be challenged on and
and disability comes in in many shapes
visible disability often leads to abuse
but also i'm very conscious one of my
daughters has
a chromosomal abnormality she has no
physical disability but she's
disadvantaged by a hidden disability
and i think that's also a problem a
hidden problem that people don't
necessarily recognize
and and i think it's it's so critical
that
individuals like yourself rosie
challenge the rest of society
repeatedly the fight needs to go on and
we can
never be you know relaxed and not
challenge
ourselves whether it's disability or any
type of prejudice
marin i haven't much to add that to be
honest except for just to say that uh
from what we hear it's perfectly obvious
that there aren't
there are you know not that many
families in the uk that aren't in some
way touched by the difficulties of
having someone with a disability inside
their family
um and obviously there's a lot more to
be to be done to help everybody with
that but
i would also say that we mustn't
underestimate how far we've come
over the last 25 years i mean you know
everybody now understands which i don't
think they did then that
lack of access to transport to buildings
to education to employment
etc was it was a travesty and now is
considered to be
to be something that everyone should
have access to so there has been
huge change over the last 25 years
obviously there's a long way to go
um but we must remember how far we've
come as well i was quite surprised to
learn that rules on accessible public
transport come into force for buses and
coaches
uh from the end of this year which is
obviously so many years
after the disability discrimination act
i mean rail replacement buses for
example 60
of them are not are not accessible
there's quite a few hands up uh
emily thank you um i just want to say
applaud rosie for challenging uh you're
all on that but also i want to raise an
issue that was just mentioned about sdn
and children are struggling in schools
the delays and diagnosis for neuro
differences at the moment is over three
years
in many areas including kent and kobit
is only going to increase that delay
disability discrimination act gave us
the rights to
education there are lots of children
that are not able to access education
because they're still waiting for a
diagnosis what is going to be done about
that
uh donna um i think we need to remember
that any one of us we couldn't become
disabled at any point in time
so when we're supporting and increasing
access for disabled people
we're actually supporting ourselves
we're supporting the entire country
so i think looking at this as you know
as issues that's just as disabled people
is
is just i don't think it's helpful it's
about how do we
increase access to all of us including
disabled people
and that's how i think how we should
look at this daniel
is it a matter of adding new legislation
or becoming a less judgmental society
well i admire you so much rosie for the
way that you
you articulate this and
i i i thought what emily said was so
strong
in a small way um i have i
am neurodiverse i'm dyslexic and it took
me
until i was 18 until i was
diagnosed and then i got the support i
need and it made an
enormous difference to me but i was
lucky because i was able to
i was essentially able to get by on my
on my maths and my
uh uh despite the fact that my language
skills were very poor
um at my written language skills at
school um
and um so i've i've felt uh you know
just a tiny bit of
what that feels like um but
i think that daniel's point is just so
important which is
of course legislation's important and
and that is something we should always
be pushing forward like with the change
of the buses at the end of this year
i didn't know about that i think that's
really important but my god how long has
it taken us to get to this point
but it's also about society accepting
everyone
and looking for the good in everyone you
know i think that everyone has something
to contribute and we need to
go and it's our our task our mission is
to go and find what is good in people
and the contribution they can make and
and and bring it out and support people
to do that
so i i think i think there's a long way
to go
rosie we're almost out of time but i
just want to give you a final word on
that
and i think i keep myself
without talking about
the change between
the dli disability living
allowance toilet personal
independence payment
because 650
000 disabled people
including myself
got courts and
ladies makes me
insanely angry that
i saw when i was
assassed in 2008 that
morning that kept me
go when that gave me support
it was taken off
me and locally
i came worked out i
can push myself but
a lot of disabled people
and now on the property line
because they were assessed
by a stranger
for 10 minutes who would
look at them and go
what what do you need
that you're too much
about world barriers
and yet i want to end
it by going stop
ignoring disabled people
we make up 22
of the population
were here and were worth
listening to
rosie look at that
if the people here in this studio with
us you'd hear the applause you can only
see it